

 
        HIGHER EDUCATION COMMISSION 
                          STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURE (SOP) FOR 
THEMATIC RESERCH GRANTS PROGRAM  
 
 
1. Introduction 
Higher education sector of Pakistan has been playing an important role in improving the quality 
of  teaching and developing  research  culture  through  innovative  ways.  Realizing  the  need  of 
ensuring  the  concept  of  knowledge  economy  in  true  sense  it  initiated  different  incentivized 
programs  in  both  the  public  and  private  sector  universities/institutions  to  motivate  and 
encourage  the  potential researchers in  almost  all  disciplines.  However,  besides  its  focus  on 
promoting  research  culture  in  sciences it also concentrated on  promoting  research  culture  in 
social sciences. 
It, hence, intends to encourage the creative and talented faculty members to probe into those 
areas (see the different thematic areas in attachment) that check the growth, development and 
progress of Pakistan. Such encouragement not only helps in addressing the key issues paralyzing 
the status of Pakistan but also unearthing those possible case studies and details which can be 
translated  into national policies  and  goals achievements.  Furthermore, thematic  research 
programme in  social  sciences  aims  to  discourage  the  on-going  brain  drain  and  utilizing  the 
innovative thinking of researchers. The following are the SOPs of the Thematic Grants Program. 
 
2. Objectives 
TGRP intends to: 
a) Address all such issues that discourage the pace of Pakistan in encountering the developed 
world; 
b) Identify  all  those  possible  avenues  which  can  ensure  the  concept  of  innovation  and 
commercialization of research output; 
c) Showcase material and  other details  or,  in  other  words,  profile  of  Pakistan  vis-à-vis  other 
countries, if required, for understanding of the readers, academics, policy makers as well as 
for developing holistic development strategies; 
d) Encourage diversity based researches to help develop grounded and feasible understanding 
of the issues through diverse lenses.   
e) Ensure continuity, implementation, and institutionalization of previous research done under 
Thematic Research Grant Program. 
 
Thematic 
Research 
Grants 

f) Converting the earlier research into policies, programs, interventions, electronic and training 
materials, degree programs, diploma courses, and publications, for wider dissemination and 
application. 
3. Amount and Budget Estimates:  
Maximum funding would be up to Rs.10.0 million for each research project. The proposed budget 
will be submitted on a separate sheet in the approved format provided along with the Application 
Form. If more than one institute is involved, the budget must clearly state the cash/kind inputs by 
and expenses for each institute in respect of all cost-heads. 
 
PI shall provide budget details along with justifications for each budget head as prescribed in the 
Application  Form.  The  contingencies  shall  not  exceed  10%  of  the  total  project  budget.  No 
additional budget shall be provided in case of any change in circumstances. 
4. Duration:  
Grants will be awarded for one year only to the applicants/proposals fulfilling the HEC Thematic 
Research Grants Criteria provided with Application Form and available at 
www.hec.gov.pk/site/thematic. 
 
In case of adverse circumstances, the application of P.I. for extension in project period may be 
considered on case to case basis. 
 
If the project proposal is funded, the institution will be responsible for the administration of the 
grant. No funds will be paid directly to the individuals.  
 
5. Eligibility Criteria  
a. Faculty members (permanent/full time) of social sciences, business education, art/design and 
humanities,  behavioral  sciences,  and  such  other  disciplines  which  are  not  covered  in  the 
science faculties, having at least PhD degree or equivalent (in case of principal investigator) 
or M.S./M.Phil. Or equivalent  (in  case  of  co-principal  investigator(s))  of  public  sector 
universities or eligible private sector universities (list is available at HEC web site) are eligible 
to apply for this research grant.   
b. Faculty members retiring in the next two years will not be entitled to receive research project 
grant.  
c. The faculty  members  on  study  leave  during the  fiscal  year  will  not be entitled  for  research 
project grant.  
d. PI must not have a history of un-successful, un-adjusted and un-accounted for previous HEC 
funded project. 
e. Proposal  must  include  a  cover  sheet,  abstract,  brief  survey  of  literature,  bibliography,  end 
user Beneficiaries, work plan and other details as per prescribed Application Form and CVs of 
the research team. 
f. Proposals  must  be  submitted  with the  approval  of  the  Vice  Chancellor/Rector/Director of 
university/DAI. 

g. Completed proposals reach the HEC office on or before the deadline. Late submissions shall 
not be considered.  
6. Other guidelines  
a. An applicant cannot submit more than one project in a year. 
b. Grants cannot be used for buying vehicles, huge hardware and other major acquisitions of a 
capital  nature  except  minor  equipment [laptop/desktop/3-in-one  copier  etc.]/accessories 
justified in proposal.  
c. Utilization  of the  research  project  grant  would be  in  line  with  budget  proposal  and  no  re-
appropriation will be allowed. 
d. PI/Co-PI shall  receive remuneration  in  Lump  sum  once  in  a  project  period from  the  2
nd
 
installment. 
e. Research Associates/Research Fellows/ Post-doctoral fellows shall be allowed to assist in the 
project if justified in the proposal. 
f. Inter-universities/institutes/DAI’s  collaborative  proposals  involving  less-developed 
institutions are encouraged.  
g. No foreign trip / training is allowed under awarded grant. 
h. The PI can appoint the team members as per approved project budget heads as and when 
needed as per proposed strategy and timeline. 
i. The PI shall be required to submit the following deliverables during course of the project; 
─ Fund Utilization duly audited by the University Auditor and Progress Report – 1 in the mid 
of the project 
─ Fund Utilization duly audited by the University Auditor and Progress Report – 2 at the end 
of the project 
─ Report should be submitted both in hard and soft form. 
─ Project-specific other deliverables as committed in the proposal. 
─ Presentation of the finding in HEC National Symposium organized for the purpose. 
─ 100 copies of Financial Academic research report printed by universities/DAIs or publisher 
of National/International repute for the end users / stakeholders. The published report 
shall  contains  outcome of  the  Research,  benefit  for  end users  are  recommendation  for 
adaptation/implementation for beneficiaries. 
Upon  receipt  of  the  above  documents,  the  HEC  shall  issue  an  NOC  /certificate  of  project 
completion to the PI and the Institution. 
 
7. Proposal Review Process  
The proposals received shall be processed as under; 
 
Initial  Screening: Proposals submitted by PI’s shall go through first scrutiny by the HEC Focal 
Person’s Staff. At this stage, based on the documents/details provided, eligible proposals shall be 
short-listed. 
 
Review by Committee: The short-listed proposals will be evaluated by a Research Project Review 
Committee appointed by HEC and its decision will be communicated to the Principal Investigator 
within three weeks of submission. 
 

Selection  of  reviewers: A  panel  of  reviewers  shall  be  selected by  HEC from Social  Sciences, 
Business Education, Art and Humanities experts in the relevant field. The applicants (PI&CO-PI) 
will not be a part of committee. 
 
Project review criteria: The review of project shall be undertaken against the approved criteria. 
For  the  proposals  which  are  otherwise  acceptable,  the  reviewers  shall  provide  a  brief 
qualitative  report  containing  guidelines/comments  for  any  further  refinements  in  the 
accepted project methodology, budget or implementation plan.  
 
8. Final Approval Proposals 
All the shortlisted proposals along with reviewers’ report would be presented to competent 
authority of HEC for grant approval of the projects for funding and award letter will be issued 
by Academic Division 
 
9. Timelines:  
To ensure the smooth running of the thematic Grants Program the following schedule shall be 
followed; 
Proposal submission  Four weeks after publishing of advertisement 
Announcement of 
successful proposals 
Eight weeks after submission of proposals 
Expected release of grants  Three weeks after announcement of successful proposals  
First Progress/ Utilization 
Reports  
The  PI  shall  submit mid-term  progress report  containing  the  project 
progress and duly audited funds utilization after 6 months of starting date 
of the project  
Second Progress OR 
Midterm Review  
The HEC authorized team may visit the project on site between 5
th
 to 8
th
 
month to see the progress, methods, inputs and outputs of the project. 
Final Report  The PI shall submit FIVE sets of Final Report to HEC and circulate 95 copies 
to  relevant  stakeholders containing  the  complete  progress  and  funds 
utilization at the end of the project  
 
10. Monitoring of the projects 
Keeping  in  view  the  number  of  funded  projects  and  administrative  convenience,  as  many 
monitoring Teams shall be appointed by HEC as appropriate. The HEC authorized teams may visit 
the project on site between 5
th
 to 8
th
 month of start of the project to see the progress, methods, 
inputs and outputs of the project.  
 
The monitoring team shall submit its evaluation report on the prescribed Performa/score card.  
To  ensure  that  monitoring  team  visits  timely,  the  HEC  authorized  Focal  Person  shall  be 
responsible to facilitate the teams in travelling and logistics etc. 
 

 
11. Change of PI/Co-PI 
If the PI leaves the Institution, then Co-PI would take the lead of the project if he is in the same 
institution.  In  case  there  is  no  Co-PI  or  Co-PI  also  leaves  the  institution,  then  VC/Rector  of 
university/ Director of DAI shall appoint a PI from amongst the project team or as per laid down 
parameters /procedure of HEC. 
 
In case both PI and Co-PI move to the same institution and jointly apply for transfer of funds to 
their  new  institution,  HEC  shall  have  no  objection  in  such  cases,  subject  to  the  adjustment  of 
funds released to previous institution and issuance of NOC about no liabilities against PI and Co-
PI with regard to the specific project. 
 
12. Submission of research proposal:  
HEC  shall  provide  all  necessary  Details  of  the  program  and documents  [Application  Form, 
Themes/Sub-themes, Budget Template etc.] on the HEC website. 
 
Four copies of the online application form duly signed and stamped by Head of Institution should 
be  submitted/  sent by  registered  mail/courier  service in the  name  of Director  (ACAD),  Higher 
Education Commission, H-8, Islamabad along with email submission at: (tshah@hec.gov.pk).  
13. Legal Deed 
Upon  acceptance  of  the  research  proposal,  the  PI  shall  submit  a  Legal  Deed  endorsed  by  the 
respective VC/Director in order to receive the grant. 
14. Right of HEC 
In case of the Non-Compliance of the Deed by the grantee of the TRGP/ Non-fulfillment of the 
procedure the HEC shall reserve the right to cancel the Deed forthwith. Moreover, in case of non-
observance  of  the  time  duration  of  research  work  (Including  the  approved  period  of  the 
extension) the HEC shall not grant TRGP to the same University/DAI, again/ for the next time.  
   
 
Dr. Muhammad Tahir Ali Shah 
Director [Academics]/Focal Person Social Sciences 
Higher Education Commission, H-9, Islamabad 
Phone: 051-90402104, 90402127 Fax: 051-90402102 
Email: tshah@hec.gov.pk 
URL: www.hec.gov.pk/site/thematic 
 